---
title: Glossary-new
author: 
date: 
reviewers: 
layout: default
---

%M: This is the python symbol for *minute*

%s: This token allows for string values to be formatted into a string

%S(time): The python symbol for *second*

%Y: This is the python symbol for *year*

%d: This token allows for decimals to be formatted into a string

%d(time): The python symbol for *day*

%m(time): The python symbol for *month*

%i: A formatting code that imbeds numbers as integers

%f: A formatting code that imbeds numbers as floating point decimals

algorithm: A step-by-step procedure for performing a calculation

alphanumeric characters: This set includes the letters A-Z and the
numerals 0-9

append: A python method which allows you to add to a string

argument: An argument is a term for the parameters of a list or function

assignment: A statement which associates a variable with a value

bigram A string of two *tokens*; this can be as simple as a sequence of
two letters (see n-gram)

body tag: An html tag used to separate body content from headers,
footers, and other information in an html page

branching: Instructs a program to be run only if certain conditions are
met

break: A python statement which terminates the current *for* or *while*
loop. \<br\>is also an html tag which signals a break in a line of text.

call (function): Invokes a function whose arguments and outputs have
already been defined (see function)

client: A computer program which retrieves information made available by
a server

close: f.close() is a function which can be called to close an open
python file; after using f.close(), the file cannot be used

command output: The window in your text editor where the output of
programs is displayed

comment: A line of code that signals something to the programmer, but is
not read by the computer. In Python, comments are written by beginning a
line with the \# key

compile: To turn Python source code into byte code; useful for storing
and sharing files

concatenate: To join two strings together

continue: A python statement which ignores the current iteration of a
*for* or *while* loop, and continues the loop from its beginning

date: a class in the datetime module which specifies date with the
attributes year, month, and day

debug: A process used to find and fix errors in computer code

define: Create a function by specifying its parameters and its function
code (what action is taken)

dict: The command used to call a python dictionary

dictionary: An unordered set of keys with attached values

directory: A location where files are stored

doctype: A command that associates a page with a particular type of html
code

equality: When two *objects* are set to an equal value; performed by
using an = sign

escape sequence: Characters used to signal an alternative interpretation
of other characters

file method: A function which can be called on an open file object

file object: The file.open() function creates a file object, to which
other methods can then be applied

find: .find() is a file method which determines whether a string is part
of a substring

floor division: Also called *integer division* floor division produces a
result that is rounded down to the nearest integer. In python it is
signalled by //

for loop: A statement which allows code to be repeatedly executed *for*
specific values of a give variable

frequency pairs: A result which pairs specific tokens with their
frequency in a data set. If a program determines that the word ‘mine’
occurs 17 times in a passage, the result may appear as the frequency
pair (17, mine)

function: A single block of reusable code which performs a specific
action. Python comes with a number of built-in functions, but new
functions may also be defined by the user

head tag: An html tag which identifies information about the page, such
as the style sheet

high-level programming language: A language whose commands are nearer to
natural language and can accomplish tasks with fewer commands. Python is
considered a high-level programming language

html tag: These are tags imbedded in html code which style the text on
the page; they are always surrounded by \<\> brackets

if/elif: A certain action will be taken *if* certain conditions are met.
If they are *not* met, a certain other action will be taken

if statement: A certain action will be taken *if* certain conditions are
met

import: Finds and initiates a module within python

index.html: A file name which is generally recognized as the first, or
*home *page of a website**

index position: The starting location of a substring within a string,
given as an integer value

integer: The int() function can be used to convert a number or a string
to an integer

join method: .join() is a method which takes separate elements of a
sequence and joins them into a single string

key: In a python dictionary, a key is used to identify a certain value

keyword: Keywords are part of the Python language with a reserved
meaning; they cannot be used as ordinary identifiers. You can find a
list of Python keywords [here.][]

keyword in context (KWIC): Searching for KWIC results in a list of
target words, surrounded by a designated number of terms immediately
before and after the target term in the text

len: A built-in function which returns the length (number of items) of
an object

length: the number of items in an object

library: A collection of code functions which can be easily called by
the programmer. Python has a large standard library, but other libraries
can be created and used as well

list: A list in python is a container which holds a sequence of objects
in a particular order

list comprehension: Using expressions to create a list concisely, rather
than entering all of the data into the sequence

list compression: Re-writing a list so that it is more efficiently coded

looping: Instructing a program to run repeatedly

low-level programming language: A programming language that is closer to
machine code than natural language. It may be more efficient but less
user-friendly

.lower(): A function that can be used to fold characters to lower case

markup: A system of annotation using tags that are distinguishable from
the text. Html tags are a good example of markup

metadata: Information which describes the structure, class, or content
of other data. A library calling card contains metadata about individual
books

method: A function whose first parameter is a class

modularization: Splitting code into independent modules which can be
called when needed

module: A file containing python definitions and statements. Ideally, a
module is not dependent on outside code

multiply: Pyhton uses the \* symbol for multiplication

n-gram: A contiguous sequence of tokens (words, characters, etc.) in a
larger sequence

\\n: A line break can be created in Python using the *\\n command*

normalizing data: The process of making data sets uniform, so that they
can easily be analysed

object: All Python objects have a unique identity, a type, and contain
some content

object oriented: A type of programming language that relies on
inter-related *objects* rather than a list of processes. Python is an
object-oriented language

open: f.open() is a function which is used to open a file in Python

operator: a character that describes the interaction between two
variables. A list of the basic Python operators can be found [here][]

parameter: A command that signals which particular action should be
taken by a particular method

port: A data connection between two computer programs over a network

pre tag: An html tag which displays text in a fixed-width, preserving
spaces and line breaks; known as a pre element

print: A function which evaluates expressions and returns the result

python shell: An interface which allows you to interact with python

query string: The part of a webpage URL which contains data to be passed
to a web application; usually it is the last part of a URL

read: f.read() is a Python function which reads specified parts of a
file

regular expression: A module which allows you to search for a number of
well defined patterns. Needs to be imported as the module re

replace: .replace() is a string method which can replace current values
in a string with other values

rjust: A method which converts data to right justification

script tag: An html tag used to identify a client side script integrated
into a page

self-documenting: A file which automatically creates and stores its
metadata

sequence: A way to store multiple values in an organized fashion. Common
sequences include strings, lists, tuples, and dictionaries among others

server: A computer that is dedicated to serving the needs of a computer
network by hosting information

slice: A method for creating a substring by removing characters from the
beginning and end of a string

stop word: A common word that is removed from a list for the purpose of
text analysis

str: The symbol for string

string: A common object type that contains a list of characters. A
string can be created by surrounding a list of characters with quotation
marks

string formatting: Allows for strings to be interpolated into other
strings

string formatting codes: Instructions on how to interpolate strings

string manipulation: Alteration of the data set within a string using
string methods

string method: Methods used for string manipulation. Items in a string
can be split, joined, capitalized, replaced, or otherwise altered

string operator: A symbol used to manipulate strings; functions much
like a mathematic expression

subsequence: A specific set of values within larger sequence

substring: A segment of a string. If string [ab] was split in to two
substrings, it would be noted as [a:b]

time library: Python’s standard module ‘datetime’ supplies classes for
collecting and manipulating data about time and date

title tag: This html tag notes the title of a web page which will be
displayed at the top of the browser tab

trigram: An n-gram containing three tokens

tuple: an ordered list of elements

unicode: a set of standard characters used to ensure uniform coding

unordered: A list of data that is not compiled under any system of
classification

url: A Uniform Resource Locator (url) is a specific character string
which references an internet resource. When you are looking at a web
page, the url of that page is displayed in the address bar of your
browser

wrapper: A module which permits python code to be used when interacting
with a non-python interface

write: f.write() is a function which writes the contents of a string to
a file

zip: A file format which allows for the storage of compressed files

  [here.]: http://docs.python.org/release/2.3.5/ref/keywords.html
  [here]: http://www.tutorialspoint.com/python/python_basic_operators.htm
