---
title: Creating an Omeka.net Exhibit
authors:
- Miriam Posner
date: 2013-04-24
reviewers:
- Adam Crymble
- Sheila Brennan
layout: default
previous: up-and-running-with-omeka
---

In the lesson [Up and Running with Omeka.net][], you added items to your
Omeka.net site and grouped them into collections. Now you are ready for
the next step: taking your users on a guided tour through the items you
have collected.

### Before you begin: Plan your exhibit

It pays to do some thinking before you launch into creating an exhibit.
You will be creating both sections and pages, and you will need to give
some thought to the argument you want to make and how you intend to make
it. In this lesson that follows, I use the silly example of my dogs. But
what if I were discussing, say, silent film? My sections might be
thematic (comedies, romances, dramas), chronological (early silent film,
the transitional period, classical era), or stylistic (modernist,
impressionist, narrative). It all depends on the message I want to
convey to the site’s visitors. You might draw out a map of your exhibit,
showing where you want to put each digital asset.

### Add an exhibit

![media\_1363324520297.png][]

<figcaption>Figure 1: Add an exhibit in Omeka</figcaption>

A collection is just a list of objects. An exhibit, on the other hand,
is a guided tour through your items, complete with descriptive text and
customized layouts. To create one, click on the **Exhibits** tab and
then **Add an exhibit**. Fill out the form on the top half of the page.
A **slug** is a machine-readable name for your exhibit and will become
part of your URL. The slug of this lesson is
“creating-an-omeka-exhibit,” which you can see in the URL at the top of
your browser.

### Add a section

![media\_1363324690767.png][]

<figcaption>Figure 2: Add a section in Omeka</figcaption>

Every exhibit has sections and pages — like the chapters and individual
pages in a book. Add a new section by clicking on the green **Add
Section** button and then filling out the information on the following
page.

### Add a page

![media\_1363324853892.png][]

<figcaption>Figure 3: Add a page in Omeka</figcaption>

Pages are where you will stick the actual items in your exhibit. Click
on the green **Add Page** button. On the following page, you will enter
some information and pick a layout for your exhibit page. The small blue
squares indicate item thumbnails, the large blue squares indicate
full-sized images, and the lined areas indicate descriptive text. Pick a
layout; you can change it later. Then click on **Save Changes**.

### Add items to your page

![media\_1363325083453.png][]

<figcaption>Figure 4: Add items to your page</figcaption>

On the page that follows, you will see a numbered grid. You will fill in
that grid by attaching items (in the places indicated by blue boxes) and
typing in descriptive information about your item. Remember, an exhibit
is a kind of guided tour through your items, so try to write
descriptions that guide the reader from one item to the next. When you
are finished adding items, you can add another page, or another section,
or both.

When you are done, return to your public site to see how your Omeka site
looks.

### You have an Omeka site!

![media\_1363325355106.png][]

<figcaption>Figure 5: The completed Omeka Exhibit</figcaption>

Now your site has items, collections, and an exhibit — all the basic
units of an Omeka site.

### Further Resources

-   The Omeka team has put together great resources on
    the software’s [help pages][]

  [Up and Running with Omeka.net]: /lessons/up-and-running-with-omeka
  [media\_1363324520297.png]: ../images/media_1363324520297.png
  [media\_1363324690767.png]: ../images/media_1363324690767.png
  [media\_1363324853892.png]: ../images/media_1363324853892.png
  [media\_1363325083453.png]: ../images/media_1363325083453.png
  [media\_1363325355106.png]: ../images/media_1363325355106.png
  [help pages]: http://info.omeka.net/
