---
title: Sustainable Authorship in Plain Text using Pandoc and Markdown
layout: lesson
date: 2014-03-19
authors:
- Dennis Tenen
- Grant Wythoff
editors:
- Fred Gibbs
difficulty: 2
activity: sustaining
topics: [website, data-management]
abstract: "In this tutorial, you will first learn the basics of Markdown—an easy to read and write markup syntax for plain text—as well as Pandoc, a command line tool that converts plain text into a number of beautifully formatted file types: PDF, .docx, HTML, LaTeX, slide decks, and more."
exclude_from_check:
  - reviewers
  - review-ticket
redirect_from: /lessons/sustainable-authorship-in-plain-text-using-pandoc-and-markdown
---

{% include toc.html %}





{% include figure.html filename="lexoriter.jpg" caption="" %}

## Objectives

In this tutorial, you will first learn the basics of Markdown—an easy to
read and write markup syntax for plain text—as well as
[Pandoc](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/), a command line tool that
converts plain text into a number of beautifully formatted file types:
PDF, .docx, HTML, LaTeX, slide decks, and more.[^1] With Pandoc
as your digital typesetting tool, you can use Markdown syntax to add
figures, a bibliography, formatting, and easily change citation styles
from Chicago to MLA (for instance), all using plain text.

The tutorial assumes no prior technical knowledge, but it scales with
experience, as we often suggest more advanced techniques towards the end
of each section. These are clearly marked and can be revisited after
some practice and experimentation.

Instead of following this tutorial in a mechanical way, we recommend you
strive to understand the solutions offered here as a *methodology*,
which may need to be tailored further to fit your environment and
workflow. The installation of the necessary tools presents perhaps the
biggest barrier to participation. Allot yourself enough time and
patience to install everything properly, or do it with a colleague who
has a similar set-up and help each other out. Consult the [Useful
Resources](#useful-resources) section below if you get
stuck.[^2]

## Philosophy

Writing, storing, and retrieving documents are activities central to the
humanities research workflow. And yet, many authors base their practice
on proprietary tools and formats that sometimes fall short of even the
most basic requirements of scholarly writing. Perhaps you can relate to
being frustrated by the fragility of footnotes, bibliographies, figures,
and book drafts authored in Microsoft Word or Google Docs. Nevertheless,
most journals still insist on submissions in .docx format.

More than causing personal frustration, this reliance on proprietary
tools and formats has long-term negative implications for the academic
community. In such an environment, journals must outsource typesetting,
alienating authors from the material contexts of publication and adding
further unnecessary barriers to the unfettered circulation of
knowledge.[^3]

When you use MS Word, Google Docs, or Open Office to write documents,
what you see is not what you get. Beneath the visible layer of words,
sentences, and paragraphs lies a complicated layer of code
understandable only to machines. Because of that hidden layer, your
.docx and .pdf files depend on proprietary tools to be rendered
correctly. Such documents are difficult to search, to print, and to
convert into other file formats.

Moreover, time spent formatting your document in MS Word or Open Office
is wasted, because all that formatting is removed by the publisher
during submission. Both authors and publishers would benefit from
exchanging files with minimal formatting, leaving the typesetting to the
final typesetting stage of the publishing process.

This is where Markdown shines. Markdown is a syntax for marking semantic
elements within a document explicitly, not in some hidden layer. The
idea is to identify units that are meaningful to humans, like titles,
sections, subsections, footnotes, and illustrations. At the very least,
your files will always remain comprehensible to you, even if the editor
you are currently using stops working or "goes out of business."

Writing in this way liberates the author from the tool. Markdown can be
written in any plain text editor and offers a rich ecosystem of software
that can render that text into beautiful looking documents. For this
reason, Markdown is currently enjoying a period of growth, not just as
as means for writing scholarly papers but as a convention for online
editing in general.

Popular general purpose plain text editors include
[TextWrangler](http://www.barebones.com/products/textwrangler/) and
[Sublime](http://www.sublimetext.com) for Mac,
[Notepad++](http://notepad-plus-plus.org) for Windows, as well as
Gedit and Kate for Linux. However, there are also editors that specialize
in displaying and editing Markdown.

It is important to understand that Markdown is merely a convention.
Markdown files are stored as plain text, further adding to the
flexibility of the format. Plain text files have been around since the
electronic typewriter. The longevity of this standard inherently makes
plain text more sustainable and stable than proprietary formats. While
files produced even ten years ago in Microsoft Word and Apple's Pages
can cause significant problems when opened with the latest version, it
is still possible to open a file written in any number of "dead" plain
text editors from the past several decades: AlphaPlus, Perfect Writer,
Text Wizard, Spellbinder, WordStar, or Isaac Asimov's favorite SCRIPSIT
2.0, made by Radio Shack. Writing in plain text guarantees that your
files will remain readable ten, fifteen, twenty years from now. In this
tutorial, we outline a workflow that frees the researcher from
proprietary word processing software and fragile file formats.

It is now possible to write a wide range of documents in one
format—articles, blog posts, wikis, syllabi, and recommendation
letters—using the same set of tools and techniques to search, discover,
backup, and distribute our materials. Your notes, blog entries, code
documentation, and wikis can all be authored in Markdown. Increasingly,
many platforms like WordPress, Reddit, and GitHub support Markdown
authorship natively. In the long term, your research will benefit from
such unified workflows, making it easier to save, search, share, and
organize your materials.

## Principles

Inspired by best practices in a variety of disciplines, we were guided
by the following principles:

1.  *Sustainability.* Plain text both ensures transparency and answers
    the standards of long-term preservation. MS Word may go the way of
    Word Perfect in the future, but plain text will always remain easy
    to read, catalog, mine, and transform. Furthermore, plain text
    enables easy and powerful versioning of the document, which is
    useful in collaboration and organizing drafts. Your plain text files
    will be accessible on cell phones, tablets, or, perhaps, on a
    low-powered terminal in some remote library. Plain text is backwards
    compatible and future-proof. Whatever software or hardware comes
    along next, it will be able to understand your plain text files.

2.  *Preference for human-readable formats.* When writing in Word or
    Google Docs, what you see is not what you get. The .doc file
    contains hidden, automatically-generated formatting characters,
    creating an obfuscated typesetting layer that is difficult for the
    user to troubleshoot. Something as simple as pasting an image or
    text from the browser can have unpredictable effects on your
    document's formatting.

3.  *Separation of form and content.* Writing and formatting at the same
    time is distracting. The idea is to write first, and format later,
    as close as possible to the time of publication. A task like
    switching from Chicago to MLA formatting should be painless. Journal
    editors who want to save time on needless formatting and copy
    editing should be able to provide their authors with a formatting
    template which takes care of the typesetting minutia.

4.  *Support for the academic apparatus.* The workflow needs to handle
    footnotes, figures, international characters, and bibliographies
    gracefully.

5.  *Platform independence.* As the vectors of publication multiply, we
    need to be able to generate a multiplicity of formats including for
    slide projection, print, web, and mobile. Ideally, we would like to
    be able to generate the most common formats without breaking
    bibliographic dependencies. Our workflow needs to be portable as
    well–it would be nice to be able to copy a folder to a thumbdrive
    and know that it contains everything needed for publication. Writing
    in plain text means you can easily share, edit, and archive your
    documents in virtually any environment. For example, a syllabus
    written in Markdown can be saved as a PDF, printed as a handout, and
    converted into HTML for the web, all from the same file. Both web
    and print documents should be published from the same source and
    look similar, preserving the logical layout of the material.

Markdown and LaTeX answer all of these requirements. We chose Markdown
(and not LaTeX) because it offers the most light-weight and clutter free
syntax (hence, mark *down*) and because when coupled with Pandoc it
allows for the greatest flexibility in outputs (including .docx and .tex
files).[^5]

## Software Requirements

We purposefully omit some of the granular, platform- or operating
system-bound details of installing the software listed below. For
example, it makes no sense to provide installation instructions for
LaTeX, when the canonical online instructions for your operating system
will always remain more current and more complete. Similarly, the
mechanics of Pandoc installation are best explored by searching for
"installing Pandoc" on Google, with the likely first result being
Pandoc's homepage.

-   **Plain text editor**. Entering the world of plain-text editing
    expands your choice of innovative authoring tools dramatically.
    Search online for "markdown text editor" and experiment with your
    options. It does not matter what you use as long as it is explicitly
    a plain text editor. Notepad++ on Windows or TextWrangler on Macs
    are easy, free choices. Remember, since we are not tied to the tool,
    you can change editors at any time.

-   **Command line terminal**. Working "in the command line" is
    equivalent to typing commands into the terminal. On a Mac you simply
    need to use your finder for "Terminal". On Windows, use PowerShell.
    Linux users are likely to be familiar with their terminals already.
    We will cover the basics of how to find and use the command line
    below.

-   **Pandoc**. Detailed, platform-specific installation instructions
    are available at [the Pandoc
    website](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/installing.html).
    *Installation of Pandoc on your machine is crucial for this
    tutorial*, so be sure to take your time and click through the
    instructions. Pandoc was created and is maintained by John
    MacFarlane, Professor of Philosophy at the University of California,
    Berkeley. This is humanities computing at its best and will serve as
    the engine of our workflow. With Pandoc, you will be able to compile
    text and bibliography into beautifully formatted and flexible
    documents. Once you've followed the installation instructions,
    verify that Pandoc is installed by entering `pandoc --version` into
    the command line. We assume that you have at least version 1.12.3,
    released in January 2014.

The following two pieces of software are recommended, but not required
to complete this tutorial.

-   **Zotero or Endnote**. Bibliographic reference software like Zotero
    and Endnote are indispensable tools for organizing and formatting
    citations in a research paper. These programs can export your
    libraries as a BibTeX file (which you will learn more about in Case
    2 below). This file, itself a formatted plain text document of all
    your citations, will allow you to quickly and easily cite references
    using `@tags`. It should be noted that it's also possible to type
    all of your bibliographic references by hand, using [our
    bibliography](https://github.com/dhcolumbia/pandoc-workflow/blob/master/pandoctut.bib)
    as a template.

-   **LaTeX**. Detailed, platform-specific installation instructions
    available at [the Pandoc
    website](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/installing.html). Although
    LaTeX is not covered in this tutorial, it is used by Pandoc for .pdf
    creation. Advanced users will often convert into LaTeX directly to
    have more granular control over the typesetting of the .pdf.
    Beginners may want to consider skipping this step. Otherwise, type
    `latex -v` to see if LaTeX was installed correctly (you will get an
    error if it was not and some information on the version if it was).

## Markdown Basics

Markdown is a convention for structuring your plain-text documents
semantically. The idea is to identify logical structures in your
document (a title, sections, subsections, footnotes, etc.), mark them
with some unobtrusive characters, and then "compile" the resulting text
with a typesetting interpreter which will format the document
consistently, according to a specified style.

Markdown conventions come in several "flavors" designed for use in
particular contexts, such as blogs, wikis, or code repositories. The
flavor of Markdown used by Pandoc is geared for academic use. Its
conventions are described on the [Pandoc's
Markdown](http://pandoc.org/README.html#pandocs-markdown)
page. Its conventions include the ["YAML"
block](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/README.html#yaml-metadata-block),
which contains some useful metadata.

Let's now create a simple document in Markdown. Open a plain-text editor
of your choice and begin typing. It should look like this:

    ---
    title: Plain Text Workflow
    author: Dennis Tenen, Grant Wythoff
    date: January 20, 2014
    ---

Pandoc-flavored Markdown stores each of the above values, and "prints"
them in the appropriate location of your outputted document once you are
ready to typeset. We will later learn to add other, more powerful fields
to the YAML block. For now, let's pretend we are writing a paper that
contains three sections, each subdivided into two subsections. Leave a
blank line after last three dashes in the YAML block and paste the
following:

    # Section 1

    ## Subsection 1.1
    Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam, quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo consequat.

    Next paragraph should start like this. Do not indent.

    ## Subsection 1.2
    Sed ut perspiciatis unde omnis iste natus error sit voluptatem accusantium doloremque laudantium, totam rem aperiam, eaque  ipsa quae ab illo inventore veritatis et quasi architecto beatae vitae dicta sunt explicabo.

    # Section 2

    ## Subsection 2.1

Go ahead and enter some dummy text as well. Empty space is meaningful in
Markdown: do not indent your paragraphs. Instead, separate paragraphs by
using an blank line. Blank lines must also precede section headers.

You can use asterisks to add bold or italicized emphasis to your words,
like this: `*italics*` and `**bold**`. We should also add a link and a
footnote to our text to cover the basic components of an average paper.
Type:

    A sentence that needs a note.[^1]

    [^1]: my first footnote! And a [link](https://www.eff.org/).

When the text of the link and the address are the same it is faster to
write `<www.eff.org>` instead of `[www.eff.org](www.eff.org)`.

Let's save our file before advancing any further. Create a new folder
that will house this project. You are likely to have some system of
organizing your documents, projects, illustrations, and bibliographies.
But often, your document, its illustrations, and bibliography live in
different folders, which makes them hard to track. Our goal is to create
a single folder for each project, with all relevant materials included.
The general rule of thumb is one project, one paper, one folder. Name
your file something like `main.md`, where "md" stands for markdown.

Once your file is saved, let's add an illustration. Copy an image (any
small image) to your folder, and add the following somewhere in the body
of the text: `![image caption](your_image.jpg)`.

At this point, your `main.md` should look something like the following.
You can download this sample .md file
[here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/programminghistorian/jekyll/gh-pages/assets/sample.md).

    ---
    title: Plain Text Workflow
    author: Dennis Tenen, Grant Wythoff
    date: January 20, 2014
    ---

    # Section 1

    ## Subsection 1.1
    Lorem *ipsum* dolor sit amet, **consectetur** adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam, quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo consequat.

    ## Subsection 1.2
    Sed ut perspiciatis unde omnis iste natus error sit voluptatem accusantium doloremque laudantium, totam rem aperiam, eaque  ipsa quae ab illo inventore veritatis et quasi architecto beatae vitae dicta sunt explicabo.

    Next paragraph should start like this. Do not indent.

    # Section 2

    ## Subsection 2.1
    ![image caption](your_image.jpg)

    ## Subsection 2.2
    A sentence that needs a note.[^1]

    [^1]: my first footnote! And a [link](https://www.eff.org/)

As we shall do shortly, this plain text file can be rendered as a very
nice PDF:

{% include figure.html filename="Screen-Shot-2014-11-06.png" caption="Screen shot of PDF rendered by Pandoc" %}

If you'd like to get an idea of how this kind of markup will be
interpreted as HTML formatting, try [this online
sandbox](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/dingus) and play
around with various kinds of syntax. Remember that certain elements of
*Pandoc*-flavored Markdown (such as the title block and footnotes) will
not work in this web form, which only accepts the basics.

At this point, you should spend some time exploring some of other
features of Markdown like quotations (referenced by `>` symbol), bullet
lists which start with `*` or `-`, verbatim line breaks which start with
`|` (useful for poetry), tables, and a few of the other functions listed
on Pandoc's markdown page.

Pay particular attention to empty space and the flow of paragraphs. The
documentation puts it succinctly when it defines a paragraph to be "one
or more lines of text followed by one or more blank line." Note that
"newlines are treated as spaces" and that "if you need a hard line
break, put two or more spaces at the end of a line." The best way to
understand what that means is to experiment freely. Use your editor's
preview mode or just run Pandoc to see the results of your experiments.

Above all, avoid the urge to format. Remember that you are identifying
*semantic* units: sections, subsections, emphasis, footnotes, and
figures. Even `*italics*` and `**bold**` in Markdown are not really
formatting marks, but indicate different level of *emphasis*. The
formatting will happen later, once you know the venue and the
requirements of publication.

There are programs that allow you to watch a live preview of Markdown
output as you edit your plain text file, which we detail below in the
Useful Resources section. Few of them support footnotes, figures, and
bibliographies however. To take full advantage of Pandoc, we recommend
that you stick with simple, plain text files stored locally, on your
computer.

## Getting in touch with your inner terminal

Before we can start publishing our `main.md` file into other formats, we
need to get oriented with working on the command line using your
computer's terminal program, which is the only (and best) way to use
Pandoc.

The command line is a friendly place, once you get used to it. If you
are already familiar with using the command line, feel free to skip this
section. For others, it is important to understand that being able to
use your terminal program directly will all you to use a broad range of
powerful research tools that you couldn't use otherwise, and can serve
as a basis for more advanced work. For the purposes of this tutorial,
you need to learn only a few, very simple commands.

First, open a command line window. If you are using a Mac, open Terminal
in the 'Applications/Utilities' directory. On Windows, you'll use
PowerShell. On Windows 7 or later, click Start, type "powershell" in
"Search programs and files," and hit enter.

Once opened, you should see a text window and a prompt that looks
something like this: `computer-name:~username$`. The tilde indicates
your "home" directory, and in fact you can type `$ cd ~` at any point to
return to your home directory. Don't type the dollar sign, it just
symbolizes the command prompt of your terminal, promting you to type something
into your terminal (as opposed to typing it into your document); remember to hit
enter after every command.

It is very likely that your "Documents" folder is located here. Type
`$ pwd` (= print working directory) and press enter to display the name
of the current directory). Use `$ pwd` whenever you feel lost.

The command `$ ls` (= list), which simply lists the files in the current
directory. Finally, you can use `$ cd>` (= change directory) like
`$ cd DIRECTORY_NAME` (where `DIRECTORY_NAME` is the name of the
directory you'd like to navigate to). You can use `$ cd ..` to
automatically move up one level in the directory structure (the parent
directory of the directory you are currently in). Once you start typing
the directory name, use the Tab key to auto complete the
text—particularly useful for long directory names, or directories names
that contain spaces.[^6]

These three terminal commands: `pwd`, `ls`, and `cd` are all you need
for this tutorial. Practice them for a few minutes to navigate your
documents folder and think about they way you have organized your files.
If you'd like, follow along with your regular graphical file manager to
keep your bearings.

## Using Pandoc to convert Markdown to an MS Word document

We are now ready to typeset! Open your terminal window, use `$ pwd` and
`$ cd` to navigate to the correct folder for your project. Once you are
there, type `$ ls` in the terminal to list the files. If you see your
.md file and your images, you are in the right place. To convert .md
into .docx type:

```
$ pandoc -o main.docx main.md
```

Open the file with MS Word to check your results. Alternatively, if you
use Open or Libre Office you can run:

```
$ pandoc -o project.odt main.md
```

If you are new to the command line, imagine reading the above command as
saying something like: "Pandoc, create an MS Word file out of my
Markdown file." The `-o` part is a "flag," which in this case says
something like "instead of me explicitly telling you the source and the
target file formats, just guess by looking at the file extension." Many
options are available through such flags in Pandoc. You can see the
complete list on [Pandoc's
website](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/README.html) or by typing

```
$ man pandoc
```

in the terminal.

Try running the command

```
$ pandoc -o project.html main.md
```

Now navigate back to your project directory. Can you tell what happened?

More advanced users who have LaTeX installed may want to experiment by
converting Markdown into .tex or specially formatted .pdf files. Once
LaTeX is installed, a beautifully formatted PDF file can be created
using the same command structure:

```
$ pandoc -o main.pdf main.md
```

With time, you will be able to fine tune the formatting of PDF documents
by specifying a LaTeX style file (saved to the same directory), and
running something like:

```
$ pandoc -H format.sty -o project.pdf --number-sections --toc project.tex
```

## Working with Bibliographies

In this section, we will add a bibliography to our document and then
convert from Chicago to MLA formats.

If you are not using a reference manger like Endnote or Zotero, you
should. We prefer Zotero, because, like Pandoc, it was created by the
academic community and like other open-source projects it is released
under the GNU General Public License. Most importantly for us, your
reference manager must have the ability to generate bibliographies in
plain text format, to keep in line with our "everything in plain text"
principle. Go ahead and open a reference manager of your choice and add
some sample entries. When you are ready, find the option to export your
bibliography in BibTeX (.bib) format. Save your .bib file in your
project directory, and give it a reasonable title like "project.bib".

The general idea is to keep your sources organized under one centralized
bibliographic database, while generating specific and much smaller .bib
files that will live in the same directory as your project. Go ahead and
open your .bib file with the plain-text editor of your choice.[^4]

Your .bib file should contain multiple entries that look something like
this:

    @article{fyfe_digital_2011,
        title = {Digital Pedagogy Unplugged},
        volume = {5},
        url = {http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/3/000106/000106.html},
        number = {3},
        urldate = {2013-09-28},
        author = {Fyfe, Paul},
        year = {2011},
        file = {fyfe_digital_pedagogy_unplugged_2011.pdf}
    }

You will rarely have to edit these by hand (although you can). In most
cases, you will simply "export" the .bib file from Zotero or from a
similar reference manager. Take a moment to orient yourself here. Each
entry consists of a document type, "article" in our case, a unique
identifier (fyfe\_digital\_2011), and the relevant meta-data on title,
volume, author, and so on. The thing we care most about is the unique ID
which immediately follows the curly bracket in the first line of each
entry. The unique ID is what allows us to connect the bibliography with
the main document. Leave this file open for now and go back to your
`main.md` file.

Edit the footnote in the first line of your `main.md` file to look
something like the following examples, where `@name_title_date` can be replaced with one of
the unique IDs from your `project.bib` file.

- `A reference formatted like this will render properly as inline- or footnote- style citation [@name_title_date, 67].`[^7]
- `"For citations within quotes, put the comma outside the quotation mark" [@name_title_2011, 67].`

Once we run the markdown through Pandoc, "@fyfe\_digital\_2011" will be
expanded to a full citation in the style of your choice. You can use the
`@citation` syntax in any way you see fit: in-line with your text or in
the footnotes. To generate a bibliography simply include a section
called `# Bibliography` at the end of document.

Now, go back to your metadata header at the top of your .md document,
and specify the bibliography file to be used, like so:

```
---
title: Plain Text Workflow
author: Dennis Tenen, Grant Wythoff
date: January 20, 2014
bibliography: project.bib
---
```

This tells Pandoc to look for your bibliography in the `project.bib`
file, under the same directory as your `main.md`. Let's see if this
works. Save your file, switch to the terminal window and run:

```
$ pandoc -S -o main.docx --filter pandoc-citeproc main.md
```

The upper case `S` flag stands for "smart", a mode which produces
"typographically correct output, converting straight quotes to curly
quotes, — to em-dashes, — to en-dashes and … to ellipses." The
"pandoc-citeproc" filter parses all of your citation tags. The result
should be a decently formatted MS Word file. If you have LaTeX
installed, convert into .pdf using the same syntax for prettier results.
Do not worry if things are not exactly the way you like them—remember,
you are going to fine-tune the formatting all at once and at later time,
as close as possible to the time of publication. For now we are just
creating drafts based on reasonable defaults.

## Changing citation styles

The default citation style in Pandoc is Chicago author-date. We can
specify a different style by using stylesheet, written in the "Citation
Style Language" (yet another plain-text convention, in this case for
describing citation styles) and denoted by the .csl file extension.
Luckily, the CSL project maintains a repository of common citation
styles, some even tailored for specific journals. Visit
<http://editor.citationstyles.org/about/> to find the .csl file for
Modern Language Association, download `modern-language-association.csl`,
and save to your project directory as `mla.csl`. Now we need to tell
Pandoc to use the MLA stylesheet instead of the default Chicago. We do
this by updating the YAML header:

```
---
title: Plain Text Workflow
author: Dennis Tenen, Grant Wythoff
date: January 20, 2014
bibliography: project.bib
csl: mla.csl
---
```

You then simply use the same command:

```
$ pandoc -S -o main.docx --filter pandoc-citeproc main.md
```

Parse the command into English as you are typing. In my head, I
translate the above into something like: "Pandoc, be smart about
formatting, and output a Word Doc using the citation filter on my
Markdown file (as you can guess from the extension)." As you get more
familiar with citation stylesheets, consider adding your custom-tailored
.csl files for journals in your field to the archive as a service to the
community.

## Summary

You should now be able to write papers in Markdown, to create drafts in
multiple formats, to add bibliographies, and to easily change citation
styles. A final look at the project directory will reveal a number of
"source" files: your `main.md` file, `project.bib` file, your `mla.csl`
file, and some images. Besides the source files you should see some some
"target" files that we created during the tutorial: `main.docx` or
`main.pdf`. Your folder should look something like this:

    Pandoc-tutorial/
        main.md
        project.bib
        mla.csl
        image.jpg
        main.docx

Treat you source files as an authoritative version of your text, and you
target files as disposable "print outs" that you can easily generate
with Pandoc on the fly. All revisions should go into `main.md`. The
`main.docx` file is there for final-stage clean up and formatting. For
example, if the journal requires double-spaced manuscripts, you can
quickly double-space in Open Office or Microsoft Word. But don't spend
too much time formatting. Remember, it all gets stripped out when your
manuscript goes to print. The time spent on needless formatting can be
put to better use in polishing the prose of your draft.

## Useful Resources

Should you run into trouble, there is no better place to start looking
for support than John MacFarlane's [Pandoc site](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/) and the
affiliated [mailing
list](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/pandoc-discuss). At least
two "Question and Answer" type sites can field questions on Pandoc:
[Stack Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/pandoc) and
[Digital Humanities Q&A](http://web.archive.org/web/20190203062832/http://digitalhumanities.org/answers/).
Questions may also be asked live, on Freenode IRC, \#Pandoc channel,
frequented by a friendly group of regulars. As you learn more about
Pandoc, you can also explore one of its most powerful features: [filters](https://github.com/jgm/pandoc/wiki/Pandoc-Filters).

Although we suggest starting out with a simple editor, many (70+,
according to [this blog
post](http://web.archive.org/web/20140120195538/http://mashable.com/2013/06/24/markdown-tools/))
other, Markdown-specific alternatives to MS Word are available online,
and often free of cost. From the standalone ones, we liked
[Mou](http://mouapp.com/), [Write Monkey](http://writemonkey.com), and
[Sublime Text](http://www.sublimetext.com/). Several web-based platforms
have recently emerged that provide slick, graphic interfaces for
collaborative writing and version tracking using Markdown. These
include: [prose.io](http://prose.io),
[Authorea](http://www.authorea.com), [Penflip](http://www.penflip.com),
[Draft](http://www.draftin.com), and
[StackEdit](https://stackedit.io).

But the ecosystem is not limited to editors. [Gitit](http://gitit.net/)
and [Ikiwiki](https://github.com/dubiousjim/pandoc-iki) support
authoring in Markdown with Pandoc as parser. To this list we may a range
of tools that generate fast, static webpages,
[Yst](https://github.com/jgm/yst),
[Jekyll](http://github.com/fauno/jekyll-pandoc-multiple-formats),
[Hakyll](http://jaspervdj.be/hakyll/), and [bash shell
script](https://github.com/wcaleb/website) by the historian Caleb
McDaniel.

Finally, whole publishing platforms are forming around the use of
Markdown. Markdown to marketplace platform
[Leanpub](https://leanpub.com) could be an interesting alternative to
the traditional publishing model. And we ourselves are experimenting
with academic journal design based on GitHub and
[readthedocs.org](http://readthedocs.org) (tools usually used for technical
documentation).

[^1]:  Don't worry if you don't understand some of of this terminology yet!

[^2]:  The source files for this document can be [downloaded from
    GitHub](https://github.com/dhcolumbia/pandoc-workflow). Use the
    "raw" option when viewing in GitHub to see the source Markdown. The
    authors would like to thank Alex Gil and his colleagues from
    Columbia's Digital Humanities Center, and the participants of
    openLab at the Studio in the Butler library for testing the code in
    this tutorial on a variety of platforms.

[^3]:  See Charlie Stross's excellent discussion of this topic in [Why
    Microsoft Word Must
    Die](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/10/why-microsoft-word-must-die.html).

[^4]:  Note that the .bib extension may be "registered" to Zotero
	in your operating system. That means when you click on a .bib file it is
	likely that Zotero will be called to open it, whereas we want to open it
	within a text editor. Eventually, you may want to associate the .bib
	extension with your text editor.

[^5]:  There are no good solutions for directly arriving at MS
	Word from LaTeX.

[^6]:  It is a good idea to get into the habit of not using spaces
	in folder or file names. Dashes or underscores instead of spaces in your
	filenames ensure lasting cross-platform compatibility.

[^7]:  Thanks to [@njbart](https://github.com/njbart) for the
    correction. In response to our original suggestion, `Some sentence that
    needs citation.^[@fyfe_digital_2011 argues that too.]` [he
    writes](https://github.com/programminghistorian/jekyll/issues/46#issuecomment-59219906):
    "This is not recommended since it keeps you from switching easily between
    footnote and author-date styles. Better use the \[corrected\] (no
    circumflex, no final period inside the square braces, and the final
    punctuation of the text sentence after the square braces; with footnote
    styles, pandoc automatically adjusts the position of the final
    punctuation)."
